hiraṇyākṣe potripravaravapuṣā deva bhavatā
hate śokakrodhaglapitadhṛtiretasya sahaja: |
hiraṇyaprārambha: kaśipuramarārātisadasi
pratijñamātene tava kila vadhārthaṃ madhuripo ||1||
hiraṇyākṣe (hate)	(when) Hiranyaaksha (was killed)
potri-pravara-vapuṣā	by (Thee) in the form of the exalted Boar
deva bhavatā	O Lord! By Thee
hate	was killed (then)
śoka-krodha-glapita-dhṛti:-	(his brother) who had lost mental balance due to grief and anger
etasya sahaja:	his brother
hiraṇya-prārambha: kaśipu:-	Kashipu' whose name started with 'Hiranya'
amara-arāti-sadasi	in the assembly of the enemy of the Devas (ie Asuras)
pratijñām-ātene	an oath took
tava kila vadhārthaṃ	for killing Thee, it is said
madhuripo	O Lord! Slayer of Madhu
O Lord! Slayer of Madhu! When Hiranyaaksha was killed by Thee, incarnate as the Divine Boar, his brother named Hiranyakashipu was smitten with sorrow and anger. In the assembly of the Asuras he swore to kill Thee.
vidhātāraṃ ghoraṃ sa khalu tapasitvā nacirata:
pura: sākṣātkurvan suranaramṛgādyairanidhanam |
varaṃ labdhvā dṛpto jagadiha bhavannāyakamidaṃ
parikṣundannindrādaharata divaṃ tvāmagaṇayan ||2||
vidhātāraṃ ghoraṃ	to Brahmaa, with intensity
sa khalu tapasitvā	he, indeed, performed austerities
na-cirata: pura: sākṣāt-kurvan	soon, caused him to appear
sura-nara-mṛga-ādyai:-	by god, man, beast etc
anidhanaṃ varaṃ labdhvā	of not being killed, the boon getting
dpta:	(became) arrogant
jagat-iha	here, in this world
bhavan-nāyakam-idaṃ	which has Thee for its Lord
parikṣundan-	tormenting
indrāt-aharat divaṃ	from Indra, snatched the heavens
tvām-agaṇyan	disregarding Thee
He quickly compelled Brahmaa to appear before him by performing severe austerities and made him give a boon that he would not be killed by god, man or beast etc. As a result of the boon he became arrogant and tormented the whole world which has Thee as its Lord. Disregarding Thee, he even snatched the heavens from Indra.
nihantuṃ tvāṃ bhūyastava padamavāptasya ca ripo-
rbahirdṛṣṭerantardadhitha hṛdaye sūkṣmavapuṣā |
nadannuccaistatrāpyakhilabhuvanānte ca mṛgayan
bhiyā yātaṃ matvā sa khalu jitakāśī nivavṛte ||3||
nihantuṃ tvāṃ bhūya:-	to kill Thee then
tava padam-avāptasya	who had reached Thy abode
ca ripo:-bahirdṛṣṭe:-	and from (this) enemy's physical eyes
antardadhitha	(Thou) disappeared
hṛdaye sūkṣma-vapuṣā	into the heart, in a subtle form
nandan-uccai:-tatra-api-	roaring loudly, even there (in Vaikuntha)
akhila-bhuvan-ante ca	and in all the other worlds as well
mṛgayan	searching
bhiyā yātaṃ matvā	(Thou had) gone away for fear, thinking
sa khalu jitakāśī	he ,indeed, thought that he had won
nivavṛte	returned
To kill Thee, he even went to Thy abode Vaikuntha. Thou disappeared from his gross vision and entered into his heart in a subtle form. Roaring aloud he searched for Thee in all the three worlds, and not finding Thee, he thought that Thou had fled in fear. Considering himself the winner he returned home.
tato'sya prahlāda: samajani suto garbhavasatau
munervīṇāpāṇeradhigatabhavadbhaktimahimā |
sa vai jātyā daitya: śiśurapi sametya tvayi ratiṃ
gatastvadbhaktānāṃ varada paramodāharaṇatām ||4||
tata:-asya	then, to him
prahlāda: samajani suta:	Prahlaad was born as a son
garbhavasatau	while still in the womb
mune:-vīṇā-pāṇe:-	from the sage Naarada
adhigata-	learning
bhavat-bhakti-mahimā	the glory of devotion to Thee
sa vai jātyā daitya:	though he was by birth an Asura
śiśu:-api	and a child also
sametya tvayi ratiṃ	attaining,love towards Thee, intense love
gata: tvat bhaktānām	(he) became, among Thy devotees
varada	O Bestower of Boons!
parama-udāharaṇatām (gata:)	the most outstanding example
To him was born a son named Prahlaad. Even when he was in the womb, he had learnt the glory of devotion to Thee from sage Naarada. Though by birth he was an Asura, and just a child, O Bestower of Boons! He had intense love for Thee, and became the most outstanding example for all Thy devotees.
surārīṇāṃ hāsyaṃ tava caraṇadāsyaṃ nijasute
sa dṛṣṭvā duṣṭātmā gurubhiraśiśikṣacciramamum |
guruproktaṃ cāsāvidamidamabhadrāya dṛḍhami-
tyapākurvan sarvaṃ tava caraṇabhaktyaiva vavṛdhe || 5 ||
surārīṇāṃ hāsyaṃ	the ridicule of the Asuras
tava caraṇa-dāsyaṃ	(and) devotion to Thy feet
nija-sute sa dṛṣṭvā	of his son, he seeing
duṣṭātmā	the evil minded (Hiranyakashipu)
gurubhi:-aśiśikṣat-	by the teachers made (him) learn
ciram-amum	him for a long time
guru-proktaṃ ca-asau-	and (but) he, all that was said by the teachers
idam-idam-abhadrāya dṛḍham-iti	all this will certainly cause evil, thus
apākurvan sarvaṃ	rejecting all
tava caraṇa bhaktyā-eva	by devotion to Thy feet alone
vavṛdhe	grew up
The evil minded Hiranyakashipu had Prahlaad brain washed by competent instructors for long, because he saw signs of devotion to Thee and also the ridicule of the Asuras in his son. He however rejected all their teachings as leading only to evil and grew up with his devotional zeal.
adhīteṣu śreṣṭhaṃ kimiti paripṛṣṭe'tha tanaye
bhavadbhaktiṃ varyāmabhigadati paryākuladhṛti: |
gurubhyo roṣitvā sahajamatirasyetyabhividan
vadhopāyānasmin vyatanuta bhavatpādaśaraṇe ||6||
adhīteṣu śreṣṭhaṃ kim-	among what (you have) learned, what is the best?'
iti paripṛṣṭe-	thus when asked
atha tanaye	then the son,
bhavat-bhaktiṃ varyām-	devotion to Thee as the greatest
abhigadati	replied
paryākula-dhṛti:	(He, hiranyakashipu) agitation minded
gurubhya: roṣitvā	(and) got angry with the teachers
sahaja-mati:-asya-	(this) is his natural inclination'
iti-abhividan	thus understanding
vadhopāyān-	means of killing
asmin vyatanuta	him (Prahlaad) planned
bhavat-pāda-śaraṇe	at Thy feet, who had taken refuge
On being asked about what was the best that he had learned, he answered that devotion to Thee was the greatest. Agitated at this, Hiranyakashipu was very angry with the teachers, but they told him that this was his son's natural inclination. At this he started planning ways to kill Prahlaad who was Thy great devotee, having taken refuge at Thy feet.
sa śūlairāviddha: subahu mathito diggajagaṇai-
rmahāsarpairdaṣṭo'pyanaśanagarāhāravidhuta: |
girīndravakṣipto'pyahaha! paramātmannayi vibho
tvayi nyastātmatvāt kimapi na nipīḍāmabhajata ||7||
sa:	he (Prahlaad),
śūlai:-āviddha: subahu	pierced by tridents, many times
mathita: diggaja-gaṇai:-	trampled upon by herds of huge elephants
mahā-sarpai:-daṣṭa:-	bitten by huge snakes
api-anaśana-	and also going without food (starving)
gara-āhāra-vidhuta:	tormented by poisoned food
girīndra-avakṣipta:-	thrown down from high mountains
api-ahaha	even then, what a wonder
paramātman-ayi vibho	O All Pervading Supreme Being!
tvayi nyasta-ātmatvāt	unto Thee having surrendered himself
kim-api na nipīḍām-	did not any kind of suffering
abhajat	feel
O All Pervading Supreme Being! What a wonder! Though he was pierced with tridents many times, trampled again and again by herds of huge elephants, bitten by great serpents, starved, poisoned and thrown down from the mountain peaks,he did not feel any suffering as his mind was completely fixed on Thee.
tata: śaṅkāviṣṭa: sa punaratiduṣṭo'sya janako
gurūktyā tadgehe kila varuṇapāśaistamaruṇat |
guroścāsānnidhye sa punaranugān daityatanayān
bhavadbhaktestattvaṃ paramamapi vijñānamaśiṣat ||8||
tata: śaṅkā-āviṣṭa: sa: puna:-	then being frightened, he again
ati-duṣṭa:-asya janaka:	very cruel, his father,
guru-uktyā	following the advice of the teacher
tat-gehe kila	in his (teacher's) house, it appears
varuṇa-pāśai:-	with ropes
tam-aruṇat	tied him up
guro:-ca-asānnidhye	and when the teacher was not present
sa: puna:-	he (Prahlaada) again
anugān daitya-tanayān	(with the ) Asura boys who were with him
bhavat-bhakte:-tattvam	the real nature of devotion to Thee
paramam-api vijñānam-	and also the Supreme knowledge
aśiṣat	taught
The very cruel father was frightened at this. At the advice of the teacher, Prahlaad was tied up with ropes at the teacher's house. But whenever the teacher was away, Prahlaad began to teach the Asura boys, who were with him, the doctrine of love for, and knowledge of Thee.
pitā śṛṇvan bālaprakaramakhilaṃ tvatstutiparaṃ
ruṣāndha: prāhainaṃ kulahataka kaste balamiti |
balaṃ me vaikuṇṭhastava ca jagatāṃ cāpi sa balaṃ
sa eva trailokyaṃ sakalamiti dhīro'yamagadīt ||9||
pitā śṛṇvan	(the) father on hearing
bāla-prakaram-akhilaṃ	(that) all the groups of boys
tvat-stuti-paraṃ	are intent on singing Thy praise
ruṣāndha:	blinded by rage
prāha-enaṃ	asked him
kulahataka ka:-te balam-iti	O traitor of our race, who is your strength (support)?
balaṃ me vaikuṇṭha:-	My strength is Vishnu,
tava ca	and your's,
jagatāṃ ca-api sa balaṃ	of the whole universe also He is th strength,
sa eva trailokyaṃ sakalam-	He alone is the three worlds as a whole',
iti dhīra:-ayam-agadīt	thus, that courageous and wise boy replied
Hearing that all the boys were now singing Thy praise, Hiranyakashipu became blind with rage. He shouted at Prahlaad that the traitor that he was, who was his strength? That courageous boy replied that Lord Vishnu was his strength, in as much as He was also his (father's) strength and of the whole universe. Also that the three worlds were his manifestation indeed.
are kvāsau kvāsau sakalajagadātmā haririti
prabhinte sma staṃbhaṃ calitakaravālo ditisuta: |
ata: paścādviṣṇo na hi vaditumīśo'smi sahasā
kṛpātman viśvātman pavanapuravāsin mṛḍaya mām ||10||
are kva-asau kva-asau	Oh where is he? Where is he?'
sakala-jagata-ātmā hari:-	the soul of all the worlds', that Hari
iti	thus (saying)
prabhinte sma staṃbhaṃ	struck at a pillar
calita-karavāla:	brandishing his sword
diti-suta:	the son of Diti (Hiranyakashipu)
ata: paścāt-	thereafter (what happened)
viṣṇo	O Vishnu!
na hi vaditum-īśa:-asmi sahasā	O Lord! I am not able to say immediately
kṛpātman	O All merciful!
viśvātman	O Supreme Aatman!
pavanapuravāsin	O Resider of Guruvaayur!
mṛḍaya mām	deign to make me whole
O where is he? Where is he? The soul of all the worlds who is known as Hari? The son of Diti asking struck the pillar brandishing the sword. O Vishnu! O Lord! What happened then I am unable to describe immediately. O All Merciful! O All pervading One! O resident of Guruvaayur! Deign to make me whole.